APE for how funds are used in Astropy (#72)
astropy/astropy-APEs: APE_finance.rst

> <APE title here>
> ================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Guidelines for finding and equitably distributing Astropy Project funding
=========================================================================
```

Reviewer 2: This APE is not about finding funding. It's about distributing funding. The process described is also not equitable. The process is based mostly on community input, not on equity.  The title I like is "Guidelines for Distributing Astropy Project Funding"

Author: How about "Distributing Astropy Project funding"?

Reviewer: @hamogu's suggestion sounds good to me!

```suggestion
Distributing Astropy Project Funding
====================================
```

> author: H. Moritz Günther for the finance committee

Author: I suggest we list all names here @eteq @kelle @aaryapatil @jdswinbank but I did not want to do that until you say it's OK. We did not discuss that explicitly.

Reviewer 2: Ok with me. Thanks for asking!

Reviewer 3: Likewise!

Reviewer 4: Fine with me too!

> author: H. Moritz Günther for the finance committee

Author: ```suggestion
author: Kelle Cruz, H. Moritz Günther, Aarya Patil, John Swinbank, Erik Tollerud
```

We identify four distinct considerations when disbursing funds:

* Agreeing upon the types of activities that can be funded,
* Establishing a process for deciding which specific activities should be funded,
* Finding someone to do the work (if necessary),
* Determining an appropriate compensation level.

The following sections go into detail on each of these points.

What to pay for
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
We can pay for anything which contributes to the broad mission of the Astropy Project. This includes, for example, code development, community engagement, education, promotion, etc. Funds can be used for many purposes, for example, paid developer time, teaching buyout, development of training materials, expenses for developer meetings or sprints, hosted hardware, and CI or other software services, carbon offsets, promotion and advertising, travel to conferences or meetings to promote Project activities.

How to decide what to pay for
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> 1. Pay for things that are important and otherwise won’t get done. *Rationale: there is much more work to be done than there are funds to do all of that work. There are also many volunteers and externally sponsored people interested and willing to do some of the work without compensation from the Project.*

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Pay for things that are important and otherwise will not get done. *Rationale: there is much more work to be done than there are funds to do all of that work. There are also many volunteers and externally sponsored people interested and willing to do some of the work without compensation from the Project.*
```

> 2. Don’t rely on funding always being there. Plan for sustainability: how will activities be continued when the funds dry up? Invest in documentation, infrastructure, and easy to maintain workflows. For example, funded work on governance should always record the process clearly so that volunteers who follow have less work to do to figure it out. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Do not rely on funding always being there. Plan for sustainability: how will activities be continued when the funds dry up? Invest in documentation, infrastructure, and easy to maintain workflows. For example, funded work on governance should always record the process clearly so that volunteers who follow have less work to do to figure it out. 
```

3. Consider potential positive benefits to Astropy maintainers and contributors, maintainers of other projects, end users, and other stakeholders like packagers and educators. 

> 4. Also consider the long-term costs to Astropy maintainers and contributors, to counterbalance 3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Also consider the long-term costs to Astropy maintainers and contributors, to counterbalance item number 3.
```

Reviewer 5: I changed the filename and pushed seconds after you left these comments, so I had to apply these changes manually (see latest commits)

5. Do not increase the load on volunteer maintainers by assuming they are available to review or otherwise support the work. Instead, proposals should include paid time for reviews and other necessary activities. *Rationale: the effect of spending funds should be positive for everyone, not just for the people getting paid. This is also a matter of fairness.*

Restricted / earmarked funding sources
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Much of the Project’s funding comes from specific grants from private foundations and government agencies. In these cases, the fundable activities are explicitly described in the proposal text. Such funds must be spent following the proposed plan and often come with further restrictions on who can be funded. For example, NASA funding can only go to individuals or institutions in the USA and EU funding is generally restricted to institutions or individuals in the EU or associated countries. The Finance Committee should make these restrictions clear to the community so that they may submit funding requests aligned with the existing grants.

Reviewer 6: Is it true that NASA funding can only go to folks in the US? I thought it was possible to sub-contract externally to the US with NASA money?

Author: There are two points in here:
- NASA money has some restrictions but it's not absolute. Yes, you can use NASA money to sub-contract outside of the US (e.g. purchase mirrors or CCDs for your space mission from companies outside of the US), but you can't sub-grant to non-US institutions for research (e.g. to pay for a Post-Doc to analyze your HST data). 
- For the purpose of this APE, we don't want to discuss the details of any individual grant. This is just to give an example to give the reader an idea what we are talking about.

I'll look how to re-word that.

> Much of the Project’s funding comes from specific grants from private foundations and government agencies. In these cases, the fundable activities are explicitly described in the proposal text. Such funds must be spent following the proposed plan and often come with further restrictions on who can be funded. For example, NASA funding can only go to individuals or institutions in the USA and EU funding is generally restricted to institutions or individuals in the EU or associated countries. The Finance Committee should make these restrictions clear to the community so that they may submit funding requests aligned with the existing grants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Much of the Project’s funding comes from specific grants from private foundations and government agencies. In these cases, the fundable activities are explicitly described in the proposal text. Such funds must be spent following the proposed plan and often come with further restrictions on who can be funded. In particular, government agencies, such as NASA and ESA, may have restrictions on the geographic location of the institutions and individuals receiving funding. The Finance Committee should make these restrictions clear to the community so that they may submit funding requests aligned with the existing grants.
```

Reviewer 7: This is factually untrue. Promises were made to step away from the America first approach, yet here is another example of it.

Whom to pay
^^^^^^^^^^^

> 1. All else being equal, give preference to existing maintainers/contributors.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. All else being equal, give preference to existing contributors.
```
Since maintainers are a subset of contributors? Unless the desire here is to prefer maintainers over other contributors, and then contributors over everyone else?

Author: This APE does not spell out an order of preference. I wrote it this way because "maintainers" is a well defined term for astropy, but contributor is a little bit grey. Is it anyone with an merged PR? With an open PR? To the core package? To a coordinated or affiliated package? How about people who contribute in other way, e.g. working on the roadmap?
In this PR, we suggest not to spell out every details, but to describe in broad strokes what the intentions are. APEs are hard to change, so we would like to avoid to lock in details. Depending on the exact proposals the mechanisms might be different in different situations, e.g. there might be a hiring committee or selections might use random numbers between all applications the search list [*]; so the implementation of how exactly this is done is left open.

@dstansby Do you think that's reasonable?

*: While that might be an unusual procedure, it has been variously suggested that a random draw between all candidates that are sufficiently qualified can be one method to reduce hiring biases, see e.g. https://www.hrmagazine.co.uk/content/comment/could-random-selection-in-recruitment-improve-workforce-diversity
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2392180
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s41469-021-00100-8

Reviewer 6: Yes, I think that's reasonable. To remove confusion I still think it would be easier to remove maintainers here, as they are a subset of all contibutors.

> 2. When looking outside of the current team, consider this an opportunity to make the project more diverse.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. When looking outside of the current contributor base, consider this an opportunity to make the project more diverse.
```
This removes the ambiguity of 'team'.

Author: I wrote "team" because "contributors" might be read in the sense that git and github use it (merged PR). The team would include people who e.g. are active in giving tutorials or serve on the finance committee or anything like that. Do you have an idea how to phrase that better?

Reviewer 6: I think it is worth defining what you mean by "team" or "contributors" (even if it is a deliberately vague definition), and making the use consistent throughout this APE. e.g. where I have commented above, 'contributors' is used. Should that be changed to 'team' for the reason you outline above?

> 3. Pay attention to the following when considering paying someone:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. Pay attention to the following when considering to pay someone:
```

Reviewer 3: The revised version still feels a bit off to me. Perhaps:
```suggestion
3. Pay attention to the following when considering whether to pay someone:
```
?

> 3. Pay attention to the following when considering whether to pay someone:

Reviewer 2: When I view this file, this line is bold and italic however I don't see anything in the markdown to make it so. Maybe it's just a bug in the preview.

Reviewer 5: I see that too - strange. I don't see it locally in my VSCode rst viewer though.

Reviewer 5: Actually I think I spotted the issue -- nested lists need a newline. See the updated file here: https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/9d7db599aaf5ed7317dae1cc62bbc8435188827f/APE19.rst

    * the necessary skills to execute the tasks,
    * communication and self-management skills,
    * experience contributing to and working with open source projects,
    * likelihood of long-term involvement with the Astropy community.

> It will likely depend on the particular activity as to whether there’s already a clear best candidate within the Astropy team, or if we must look for new people to get involved. This decision should be taken in accordance with documented Project governance procedures. If the position is not filled from within the project, it should generally be publicly advertised to give a broader group of people a chance to apply for it.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It will likely depend on the particular activity as to whether there’s already a clear best candidate within the Astropy contributor base, or if we must look for new people to get involved. This decision should be taken in accordance with documented Project governance procedures. If the position is not filled from within the project, it should generally be publicly advertised to give a broader group of people a chance to apply for it.
```

> It will likely depend on the particular activity as to whether there’s already a clear best candidate within the Astropy team, or if we must look for new people to get involved. This decision should be taken in accordance with documented Project governance procedures. If the position is not filled from within the project, it should generally be publicly advertised to give a broader group of people a chance to apply for it.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It will likely depend on the particular activity as to whether there’s already a clear best candidate within the Astropy team, or if we must look for new people to get involved. This decision should be taken in accordance with documented Project governance procedures. If the position is not filled from within the project, it should be publicly advertised to give a broader group of people a chance to apply for it.
```

Author: The idea here was to allow exceptions, but make clear that they have to be exceptions. There might be cases where someone outside of the project is uniquely qualified (say, we want an interface between astropty and code base XYZ or data format from observatory ABC). In that case, reaching out to XYZ or ABC is the natural step, goes much faster then an open call on mailing lists and job registers, save Astropy thework of setting up a search committee, managing and trianing someone to do the work etc. 
I imagine these situations are rare, but not impossible.

Compensating an appropriate amount 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Process
+++++++

> In general (see next section), we put the funding level directly in the hands of the community and the project members making funding requests. We use a process where community members suggest work and include a budget request which they think is required to achieve the suggested work. These suggestions are then put to the community for input and feedback. As part of the review process, the community is expected to take “value-for-money” into account. This mechanism places the trust to decide when compensation is unreasonably high or low to the community. In other cases, the Finance Committee will determine an appropriate amount taking into account the discussion and rationale below.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In general (see next section), we put the funding level directly in the hands of the community and those making funding requests. We use a process where proposers suggest work and include a budget request which they think is required to achieve the suggested work. These suggestions are then put to the community for input and feedback. As part of the review process, the community is expected to take “value-for-money” into account. This mechanism places the trust to decide when compensation is unreasonably high or low to the community. In other cases, the Finance Committee will determine an appropriate amount taking into account the discussion and rationale below.
```
Since it's possible for anyone to make a funding request, not just existing contributors?

Discussion and Rationale
++++++++++++++++++++++++
This is motivated by the fundamental tension that we, as a community, want to get the most out of the funds available, but we also want to avoid a “race to the bottom” where developers undercut others on price until the pay is too low to live on.

> Setting an appropriate level of pay for certain work is a difficult task, since a range of factors influences what people think is “fair”. This includes, to name just a few considerations,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Setting an appropriate level of pay for certain work is a difficult task, since a range of factors influence what people think is “fair.” This includes, to name just a few considerations,
```

* external factors like the cost of living in a certain place or country, 

> * if people are paid as independent contractors (and thus have to factor vacation, sick time, medical insurance etc. into an hourly rate) or as a subaward to e.g. an academic institution (which usually set rates that include overheads and fringe benefits which are then provided  to the employee),

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* if people are paid as independent contractors (and thus have to factor vacation, sick time, medical insurance, etc. into an hourly rate) or as a subaward to, e.g., an academic institution (which usually set rates that include overheads and fringe benefits that are then provided  to the employee),
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* if people are paid as independent contractors (and thus have to factor vacation, sick time, medical insurance, etc. into an hourly rate) or as a subaward to, for example, an academic institution (which usually set rates that include overheads and fringe benefits that are then provided to the employee),
```

> * What monetary value one puts on experience (e.g. an undergraduate student vs. an experienced software developer).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* What monetary value one puts on experience (e.g., an undergraduate student vs. an experienced software developer).
```

`NEP 48 <https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0048-spending-project-funds.html>`_ has extensive discussion and a good list of further references on this topic.

> We recognize though that the approach of leaving the budget entirely up to project members also has downsides: In particular, less experienced people may be tempted to suggest work packages with a compensation that is unfairly low for the work required to increase their perceived chances to obtain funding. We place trust in the community to recognize these short-comings of the process and to advise and mentor each other to propose realistic budgets that allow the proposed work to be completed with a fair rate of pay. As the diversity of proposers increases, we recognize that this approach will likely need to be modified and potentially be made more prescriptive. This may come in the form of a future APE or more incremental changes as experience grows.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We recognize though that the approach of leaving the budget entirely up to proposers also has downsides: In particular, less experienced people may be tempted to suggest work packages with a compensation that is unfairly low for the work required to increase their perceived chances to obtain funding. We place trust in the community to recognize these short-comings of the process and to advise and mentor each other to propose realistic budgets that allow the proposed work to be completed with a fair rate of pay. As the diversity of proposers increases, we recognize that this approach will likely need to be modified and potentially be made more prescriptive. This may come in the form of a future APE or more incremental changes as experience grows.
```

Author: I wrote "project members" because it's not just the proposer. People open comment and vote on it, so in that sense it's not "entirely up to the proposers". If I propose 15000 $ / h, I'm pretty sure it will get voted down, so while the *proposed budgets* are up to the proposers, the *accepted budgets* are very much also the responsibility of the project (by vote of the project members for big proposals or e.g. consent of the finance committee for small proposals).

> We recognize though that the approach of leaving the approved budget entirely up to project members also has downsides: In particular, less experienced people may be tempted to suggest work packages with a compensation that is unfairly low for the work required to increase their perceived chances to obtain funding. We place trust in the community to recognize these short-comings of the process and to advise and mentor each other to propose realistic budgets that allow the proposed work to be completed with a fair rate of pay. As the diversity of proposers increases, we recognize that this approach will likely need to be modified and potentially be made more prescriptive. This may come in the form of a future APE or more incremental changes as experience grows.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
However, we recognize that the approach of leaving the approved budget entirely up to project members also has downsides. In particular, less experienced people may be tempted to suggest work packages with a compensation that is unfairly low for the work required to increase their perceived chances to obtain funding. We place trust in the community to recognize these short-comings of the process and to advise and mentor each other to propose realistic budgets that allow the proposed work to be completed with a fair rate of pay. As the diversity of proposers increases, we recognize that this approach will likely need to be modified and potentially be made more prescriptive. This may come in the form of a future APE or more incremental changes as experience grows.
```

Defining fundable activities and projects
-----------------------------------------
We define three separate categories of expense, by value:

* Up to $2000 (US);
* $2000 to $10000 (US);
* More than $10000 (US).

Items in the first category — up to $2000 — may be approved by majority vote of the Finance Committee.

> Items in the second category — up to $10000 — can be approved by majority vote of the Finance Committee. If, in the judgment of one or more Finance Committee members, the item would not receive widespread support, the Committee will communicate these concerns to the CoCo. The CoCo may provide a decision, or may request that the Finance Committee organize a vote among the Astropy membership to approve the expense.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Items in the second category — up to $10000 — can be approved by majority vote of the Finance Committee. If, in the judgment of one or more Finance Committee members, the item would not receive widespread support, the Committee will communicate these concerns to the Coordination Committee (CoCo). The CoCo may provide a decision, or may request that the Finance Committee organize a vote among the Astropy membership to approve the expense.
```

> Items in the second category — up to $10000 — can be approved by majority vote of the Finance Committee. If, in the judgment of one or more Finance Committee members, the item would not receive widespread support, the Committee will communicate these concerns to the CoCo. The CoCo may provide a decision, or may request that the Finance Committee organize a vote among the Astropy membership to approve the expense.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Items in the second category — up to $10000 — can be approved by majority vote of the Finance Committee. If, in the judgment of one or more Finance Committee members, the item would not receive widespread support, the Committee will communicate these concerns to the CoCo. The CoCo may provide a decision, or may request that the Finance Committee organize a vote among the Astropy Voting Membership to approve the expense.
```

> Items in the third category — more than $10000 — should follow approved Project decision making methods from APE0, or a vote among the Astropy voting membership unless specifically allocated in a grant to a specific person or organization already; in the latter case the Finance Committee is tasked to ensure it is spend according to the provisions of the grant. The Finance Committee will periodically solicit suggestions from the community for projects and other major expenses and coordinate a selection process.

Reviewer 6: In what situations is are APE0 processes followed vs. a voting membership vote?

Author: I would say it's up to Coco and finance committee how exactly that is done in each case. [APE0](https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/main/APE0.rst) has several sections that might be relevant:

- (in the section on the role of the Coco): "Seek consensus among the Astropy community, particularly before acting in a formal capacity,"
- (in the section on the Coco): "To use its authority, the Coordination Committee must first attempt to reach a consensus. If a consensus cannot be reached, the Committee votes."
- (in the section on voting members): "Voting Members may and should participate in formal votes on: [...] Other matters for which the Coordination Committee believes a vote is appropriate."

So my goal here was write it in such a way that voting by voting members is the "normal", but not conflict with APE0, because APE0 aims to describe how any and all decisions are made in Astropy and this APE does not have the intent (nor the power) to overrule APE0.

> Items in the third category — more than $10000 — should follow approved Project decision making methods from `APE0 <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/main/APE0.rst>`_, or a vote among the Astropy voting membership unless specifically allocated in a grant to a specific person or organization already; in the latter case the Finance Committee is tasked to ensure it is spend according to the provisions of the grant. The Finance Committee will periodically solicit suggestions from the community for projects and other major expenses and coordinate a selection process.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Items in the third category — more than $10000 — should follow approved Project decision making methods from `APE0 <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/main/APE0.rst>`_, or a vote among the Astropy voting membership unless specifically allocated in a grant to a specific person or organization already. In the latter case, the Finance Committee is tasked to ensure it is spend according to the provisions of the grant. The Finance Committee will periodically solicit suggestions from the community for projects and other major expenses and coordinate a selection process.
```

> Items in the third category — more than $10000 — should follow approved Project decision making methods from `APE0 <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/main/APE0.rst>`_, or a vote among the Astropy voting membership unless specifically allocated in a grant to a specific person or organization already. In the latter case, the Finance Committee is tasked to ensure it is spend according to the provisions of the grant. The Finance Committee will periodically solicit suggestions from the community for projects and other major expenses and coordinate a selection process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Items in the third category — more than $10000 — should follow approved Project decision making methods from `APE0 <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/main/APE0.rst>`_, or a vote among the Astropy voting membership unless specifically allocated in a grant to a specific person or organization already. In the latter case, the Finance Committee is tasked to ensure it is spent according to the provisions of the grant. The Finance Committee will periodically solicit suggestions from the community for projects and other major expenses and coordinate a selection process.
```

*Rationale: We want the community to make the big and important decisions, but also not overburden community members with frequent discussions and voting.*

Strategy for spending/saving funds
----------------------------------

> There is an expectation from Astropy funders that the funds will be used for the benefit of the project and the community. Therefore, we should spend available funds thoughtfully, strategically, and fairly, as they become available. For emergencies, we should keep a reserve of $10,000 to $15,000 (US) which could cover, for example, a year of CI and hosting services, 1–2 months of full-time maintenance work, or engaging a consultant to address a specific need.

Reviewer 6: At $150/h (seems typical from previous proposals), 7h/day, 5 days/week, 4 weeks/month, this figure seems to be ~2 times lower than what is needed to cover 1-2 months of full time maintenance work.

Author: Would you suggest to increase it? Not everybody is paid as independent contractor (some people get sub-grants), we don't know if we keep that pay scale for everybody in the future (discussion on paying fairly is above), e.g. a undergrad student might ask for less than an experienced professional software developers. Maybe we should jsut say "a few weeks"?

Author: I guess that depends critically on what the emergency is - and we don't know that in advance. I'll go with "a few weeks" which means "not nothing, also also don't stash the money" leaving the definition of how many weeks exactly in the hands of the finance committee planning. In practice, that's not a problem right now since we have a number of contributors that are either paid by their institutions or through currently running contacts - either of them would likely step in in the case of that emergency. So, so only real data point we have is that sudden move from Travis to GH action. While I don't hope we get more emergencies, it's hard to put a number that's based on experience here at this point.

Reviewer 6: If there are emergencies that you think might happen, the scenario should be defined and costed. For example one scenario might be "All CI stops being free". You can cost that up, and add it to the total reserves required in case that happens. Has anyone actually defined those scenarios, and done those (back of the envelope) calculations to work out what a reasonable amount of reserves is? Why $10,000 and not $1000 or $100,000?

Author: The sum is taken form Numpy's NEP 48, but for astropy we have not defined a range of scenarios that should be costed for this case. To a certain degree, this is more pragmatic than that: We know that 1000 $ does not get us far, and 1e5 $ is more than we have. As an order of magnitude estimate, we can look at the Travis - > github actions switch. That took of order "a few weeks" of work (distributed over a number of people). But even that's not a hard number. In an emergency, is it sufficient to fix astropy core and infrastructure packages? How about coordinated packages? How much CI do we really need? We could probably reduce the number of runs without missing too many errors if we really have to. 

So, a second scenarios would be "Github does not offer free tier and longer". In the long run that would probably mean that we'll move away form github, but as a point of costing, let's assume that we'll pay for the cheapest paid plan they currently have. That's 48 $ / user / year. We probably have 100-200 contributors that would need access, so that's about 5-10 k$.

> There is an expectation from Astropy funders that the funds will be used for the benefit of the project and the community. Therefore, we should spend available funds thoughtfully, strategically, and fairly, as they become available. For emergencies, we should keep a reserve of $10,000 to $15,000 (US) which could cover, for example, a year of CI and hosting services, 1–2 months of full-time maintenance work, or engaging a consultant to address a specific need.

Author: ```suggestion
There is an expectation from Astropy funders that the funds will be used for the benefit of the project and the community. Therefore, we should spend available funds thoughtfully, strategically, and fairly, as they become available. For emergencies, we should keep a reserve of $10,000 to $15,000 (US) which could cover, for example, a year of CI and hosting services, a few weeks of full-time maintenance work, or engaging a consultant to address a specific need.
```

> There is an expectation from Astropy funders that the funds will be used for the benefit of the project and the community. Therefore, we should spend available funds thoughtfully, strategically, and fairly, as they become available. For emergencies, we should keep a reserve of $10,000 to $15,000 (US) which could cover, for example, a year of CI and hosting services, a few weeks of full-time maintenance work, or engaging a consultant to address a specific need.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
There is an expectation from Astropy funders that the funds will be used for the benefit of the project and the community. Therefore, we should spend available funds thoughtfully, strategically, and fairly, as they become available. For emergencies, we should keep a reserve of $10,000 to $15,000 (US) that could cover, for example, a year of CI and hosting services, a few weeks of full-time maintenance work, or engaging a consultant to address a specific need.
```
